# go-freeipa development guide

## Generation process

```
ipalib source -----------> errors.json -\
            (./dump-errors)             |------> generated.go
                                        |(./gen)
FreeIPA instance --------> schema.json -/
             ("schema" call)
```

The above diagram shows the different steps to create the generated code. The
results of each of these steps (`errors.json`, `schema.json` and `generated.go`)
are all committed, so these steps do not have to be run by users of the library.
This document explains what each step does and how to execute it.

### `./gen` step

`gen` is a golang package which uses `text/template` to create
`freeipa/generated.go` using both `.json` files. It should be run from the
`./gen` directory.

### `schema` call

FreeIPA exposes two API methods for getting a description of the API.

There is the `json_metadata` method, which is used by the official web UI to
show the "API browser". The data returned by this method is not useful, since it
does not describe any method responses (only requests).

There is also a `schema` method, which is called by the official CLI on first
start. This has a slightly different structure, but notably also describes
method respones. This is the method used to generate this library.

To regenerate `data/schema.json`: Frist, start a FreeIPA server (for example
[with Docker](https://www.freeipa.org/page/Docker)). Then, log in to the web UI
in your browser and copy your `ipa_session` cookie. Finally, make a request like
the following curl command does:

```bash
curl 'https://dc1.test.local/ipa/session/json' -H 'Origin: https://dc1.test.local' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'Accept: application/json' -H 'Cookie: ipa_session=3057327ac9ea5622d7011b122d47790e' -H 'Referer: https://dc1.test.local/ipa/ui/' --data-binary '{"method":"schema","params":[[],{"version":"2.170"}]}' --insecure > ./data/session.json
```

You'll need to adjust the URLs and the value of the `ipa_session` cookie. You
may alse need to adjust `version` in the request body.

### `./dump-errors` step

The `schema` call does not return any information about possible error codes
(eg. `4001 NotFound`). This is generated by `./dump-errors/dump.py` and saved to
`./data/errors.json`. This script requires Python 3, but has no other
dependencies. It downloads `ipalib/errors.py` from a fixed commit on GitHub,
imports it and extracts error codes from the classes which define them. You will
probably want to adjust `ERRORS_PY_URL` to point to a newer commit.

## Common tasks

### Adjusting generated code

To adjust the generated code, without changing the targeted FreeIPA version, you
only need to perform the `./gen` step.

### Targeting a newer FreeIPA version

To change the targeted FreeIPA version, you need to first need to perform the
`./dump-errors` step and the `schema` call. Afterwards, you need to perform the
`./gen` step.
